Alright, we should be on the air with Dr. Raymond Peat. This is Politics and Science. I am the host, John Barkhausen, and
today we're going to be talking about
human health and the physiological implications of some of the chemical processes that happen in the body,
namely
reduction and oxidation and some of the other factors.
My guest today is Dr. Raymond Peat. He has a PhD in biology and
speciality in physiology, and Ray, do you want to add anything to that?
Yeah, when I was studying
for my degree at University of Oregon, I
got interested in oxidative processes as they relate to aging and
I've
been thinking about
what oxidation means and all the ramifications
for 40 or 50 years and
still
curious how it really works.
I see, so it's an ongoing
scientific
endeavor, I suppose, understanding it.
Yeah, the idea of electrons moving around in matter,
that's one of my longest-standing
interests. I think it started when I was a little kid probably, but
I'm still not satisfied that
anyone knows what an electron is or how it works, but without knowing that you really don't understand
what's going on in oxidation, reduction, pH,
free radicals, and so on. Yeah, maybe you could give us a little sense of the history of
people trying to understand
chemistry. How did it all start, do you think?
Well,
the famous first demonstration that life processes are
material chemistry was when a guy synthesized urea and
people had believed that that was
maybe done by something special in the life process that couldn't be imitated in the real
inert world, but
just heating
things up on the end and
carbon dioxide, I don't remember the exact chemicals, but
it was demonstrated that you can make
urea
simply mechanically.
So people started thinking about
the chemical processes that make up life and
gradually getting away from the idea that
there is something unique about the life process that is distinct from chemistry.
I was just reading about, that was a Swedish person, is that correct, who figured out urea?
Yeah, and that was I think around the Revolutionary War in 1760-something,
but people must have experimented with
bodily fluids before then. Was there much research
done?
Yeah, in the 18th century people were really
figuring out a lot about how
organisms work,
but the
official science,
stuff that got published and approved of by the government,
that was a very slow
process that was
usually a hundred years behind the people on the ground who were really thinking about how things work.
I mean science for a large part, this is my understanding, was actually a private affair
done by usually wealthy people sometimes, or not always I suppose, but...
Yeah, rich
cranks.
So they often put their particular
philosophical or religious
bent
into the physical ideas and
it was because of that personal quality
science
was really
more literary and interesting and artistic
before the universities took it over and
gradually in physics, I guess the universities
took
control of it away from the cranks and rich guys
in the mid-19th century.
And that was the physics that Einstein, for example,
being
the
leading
academic physics was being done in Germany and
Einstein being Jewish
resented the
authoritarian dogma of the professors and
so he invented something that
outwitted
authoritarian physics establishment.
He sure did.
Boy, and
yeah, that sort of reminds me of what a general law of
institutionalization that I'm making up here on the spot, but it seems like it takes the
the interest out of most fields once it gets franchised like that.
I mean religion I think used to be more of a personal experience before the church took over and
it sounds like it's the same with science.
Yeah, and I think Einstein
himself succumbed somewhat to
authoritarian attitudes
in the case of saying what an electron is and
30 years later, I think he regretted
having
set things in motion in that particular direction when he
never accepted the
quantum mechanics view of reality as based on on randomness and
but he was
largely responsible for setting that in motion with his theory of the photoelectric effect
and the
idea of the electron as a discrete particle
interacting with a photon as a discrete particle
was
the key idea in that photoelectric effect
a photon of a given energy would
dislodge
an electron from the
solid state
giving it a certain voltage and so you can talk about the electron
energy or voltage of a given frequency of light and
that
particularized or atomized the idea of both light and electrons
and that's that's something that
Allowed theory to take over and cover up and
reject a lot of
empirical factual
observation
relating to light color
electrons molecules and so on and I think life
Wow
So that's interesting. Once you become an icon you have to be very careful what you say because people might take you seriously
Yeah, I don't know how conscious he was of that but
he was
Very persistent in
not
Fundamentally going along with with the drift of the quantum physics establishment
so so that that view of the electron and
Is atoms in general I imagine seeing the electron is an essential part of
atomic structure
How can you explain further how that actually set us on the wrong track?
Yeah
You know around the time of the First World War Michael Polanyi had demonstrated a
continuous potential
Description of how gases are bound or absorbed on the solid surfaces and
That that was a smooth sort of process a straight
Relationship between the pressure on the gas and the thickness of the absorbed layer and
When he went to Berlin to present his experimental work and theory
Einstein and others
that was already 10 years beyond the photoelectric theory and the
particularization of
light
electron
Energy or structure and
Einstein was one of the people that said
in
the advanced science world here in Germany
we know that that just isn't possible because
Matter is particular and you're just aren't going to get forces
Smoothly extending away from the surface
if the
Surface has an electrical property and the gas has an electrical property
the first layer of gas atoms hitting that surface is going to perfectly neutralize that so there's no
potential
extending through space but
Polanyi's results
Clearly showed that something like that was happening a continuously
thickening layer
and
So Polanyi was defeated
the
people like Irving Langmuir
15 years later got the Nobel Prize for
his idea that
gases can only condensed in a monolayer
And
Polanyi knew it was wrong, but he was a physics professor and
He had to teach the Langmuir
isotherm
but in his own experimental work Polanyi
Went along examining how molecules and crystals solid-state things
work and
in one
Area of research after another he kept seeing
Continuity things extending
for example
in the behavior of a crystal where previously he had shown that
gases on the surface of
activated charcoal for example for multi layers
Working with crystals. He found that the events on the surface of a crystal
Affected its elasticity and resistance all the way through
so
physically
The surface doesn't doesn't have the meaning that it seems to in geometry
And for example in
Working a crystal back and forth it gets weaker and weaker
as as it
accumulates
some kind of fatigue or memory and
J.C. Bose had
demonstrated that sort of thing and
found that the fatigue could be recovered from in a crystal, but
Polanyi was interested in the fact that
The
weakening
involves energy
flowing over long distances
creating
areas of
exaggerated weakness and
That was the same sort of effect that he saw
When the surface of a crystal was wet
the surface effect
Modified the resistance and elasticity properties of the depth of the crystal
So it was
Analogous probably to the the idea of conduction bands in which in metal
the electrons are delocalized and
The you can think of particulate electrons
acting this way, but
Polanyi's work suggested that maybe
That isn't the the only or necessary way to think of electrons
and
in
When I was in graduate school
1969 or 70 I was
reading
surface physics, especially
as a way to help understand oxidation
Biologically and in one of the physics journals
A man named Helmut Schwartz
published a description of a funny experiment
In which laser light is shined
horizontally through a crystal
while a beam of electrons
goes through the other
dimension of the crystal through the thin
Layer
A layer about less than a micron half a micron or so thick
and the
Electrons passing through the crystal are deflected into a certain pattern
Either by the electronic property of the crystal atoms that they pass by
so you can see the
shape of the crystal reflected in the image of where the electrons hit but
Ordinarily that's done exposing
electrons passing through the crystal
Exposing a piece of photographic film to the electrons and getting a chemical
Change producing the image, but he found taking
Even a fluorescent screen away putting an aluminum oxide
Coated layer at the bottom that was very non reflective
He found that the electron spots were still there, but they had the blue tint
of the laser light going sideways through the crystal and
so the spots had to be
the supposedly discrete
particulate
electrons for them to be
deflected
To exactly the right spots
Which are used to
identify crystal structures and such
but at that spot there shouldn't have been any light, but it was
the color of the laser light
Modulating in fact the the beam of electrons and
that
when I
Tried to talk to physics professors about it. They simply said it can't happen you can't modulate
one electron
Mm-hmm, and when you say modulate you mean change color or actually yeah
Yeah, the color of an electron is supposed to be its relationship
to the atom and what it's doing is is
absorbing or
interacting with a particular
wavelength of the light so the atom is
subtracting or maybe
fluorescing a color, but it's always
Subtracting or adding something according to the way it is bound to the atom
So an electron flying through space
It just wasn't acceptable
They preferred to say that the person was simply
Hallucinating or something?
But it was it done at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and
They had the best equipment
of that sort in the world at the time Wow and
a lot of people immediately trying to
replicate it
Didn't have the same
degree of vacuum in their
Electron microscope or didn't have the same power of laser
Or or the same quality of crystal making and so on
great cleanliness and so on
Was part of the original experiment. So a lot of people assert a like cold fusion
Mm-hmm
If it violates the theory and you don't have the same equipment exactly
It's very easy to
debunk
Something just by by doing a slightly different setup and getting different results. Yeah, that's right today's genius
Well, actually today's crackpot is possibly tomorrow's genius
in many cases
very recently
Helmut Schwarz who became
the head of Germany's
research granting
institution
the government's money dispenser for research
he said that
Outsiders are important everywhere. Not just in science
You don't get advanced unless you have people
Somewhat on the fringe. Yeah, if anybody wants to Google minority opinions in science
There's actually a huge amount of information out there
Scientists who have been sidelined for their
viable research but because it's bucking the current
Institutions or the money that's coming into those institutions. They're not getting any
Traction with any of their work and in fact a lot of the research is being taken away from them
research facilities, so
It's a it's a lot bigger
Faction of science than anybody hears about because of course they don't get any press either
And I've been noticing that
Institutions like the Wikipedia
Supposedly the Internet should be an opportunity to
Disseminate
Descending ideas, but
the
culture of
Authoritarian science is so strong that you see it
affecting the way Wikipedia works, it's sort of like a
sounding board for the
most authoritarian
Viewpoints in science
Yeah, and that makes sense because if you have the money of an institution behind you you have the money to pay a staff member
to keep updating Wikipedia and editing anybody's
other
input
So it's it's kind of like he who has the most resources wins
Yeah the argument so I was a little confused about the particulate
Electrons versus the is it a wave theory is the alternative or one of the alternatives to that?
What's wrong with the particles?
well you
Since you can't explain
Many events in terms of particles
It becomes a sort of mathematical magic to try to make up
theories to explain
results like pull on use or Schwartz's and
Albert and Georgi used
conventional
Quantum thinking about electrons and
went went a long way towards explaining as some of the
Biological phenomena that people hadn't been able to
even perceive
But that doesn't mean that that it necessarily validates the the particulate
Electron just because you you can explain some
important phenomena and so I think it should mean that
The whole idea of
What matter is how an electron?
works whether
It might be that
There is an electrical
Ether like material which breaks up in different ways
Into
Apparently discrete electrons, but
That rather than being an eternally discrete particle like a proton is supposed to be
The electron might be sort of an ad hoc
Interpretation
which the
wave interpretation
Is approaching that idea?
that the
and some of the
subatomic
Thinkers are saying that maybe this great variety of
Subatomic particles being seen with high energy research maybe
These are just sort of an ad hoc
response of
Matter to a particular
context or environment or or stimulation. Mm-hmm
So it might just be an aspect you're seeing depending on the the medium you're using to see it with. Yeah, exactly
see
and that would say that
In a different solar system or a different galaxy the atoms are not necessarily
Going to be the same
exact
have the same functionality and
That is an implication of Halton Arp's
Comments on his galaxy photographs
Okay, now that you brought that up you better explain what that means again
the he showed that
What appeared to be
Continuously connected
Groups of stars
One of the parts
Of what seems to be a continuous?
Stream of stars one of the parts will have
an extreme redshift difference from the other one meaning that they should be
very remote in space, but
his pictures show
Connections like one is being shot out of the other and he suggests that the one being shot out is
newly created and the new matter
Has a different way of vibrating
Which shows up as a redshift in other words?
The atoms are different when when they're fresh I
See and and you said I think last time or that another time we talked that a redshift
It means something's moving away from you is that in space?
I said that's the standard mechanical physics connection like the Doppler effect fun
Passes the frequency drops I
See so but you're saying it also could have other implications
Yeah, for example light passing close to a star
Has a frequency shift and
an Israeli
physicist astronomer named drawer Sadi I was working in the US and
He was
Studying at different times the light of of a star passing close to the Sun and
of a
Beeping quasar pulsar that sends out a certain frequency
passing close to the Sun and he
kept seeing what seemed to be a
time change or a frequency change
Depending on how close the beam came to the Sun and
he
got
an atomic clock at the US Bureau of Standards and
mounted another one on the track and
connected them by radio as so that they could be synchronized and
Then drove up the coast. I think he went up towards Maine and
Meanwhile recorded the
Relationship between these two clocks as he went and saw that
every morning at sunrise
Washington DC seemed to be redshifted away from his truck
And and his argument was that something about the
Field of the Sun coming on the scene was
Shifting the radio
Waves that were connecting the the two clocks
Otherwise, it would have looked like you had an expanding
universe to a ridiculous extent in which
Washington was moving
Million miles an hour away from Maine
Well, I think it may be
They seem remarkably out of touch
with
real life anyway
Well, that's fascinating right and
and so we're talking about the nature of the universe and ourselves and
particularly electrons I guess and electrical
feel so you're saying that the
that the
the Sun's
Electrical field when it or maybe it isn't even electrical but the wave from the Sun of radiation is
possibly
altering time slightly
He I
Think he was thinking in terms of
Gravitational field. Oh, but I don't know exactly what sunrise would mean. Okay
It's in terms of his thinking. How do you spell his name Ray so we could go look up on the internet?
What he's up to first name D. R. O. R. Okay
Sadi S a d e h. Okay. Okay. He was killed in
radiation poisoning
in the
Non-atomic bomb laboratories in Israel. Oh
Right the non-atomic bomb laboratories making the bombs. They don't have yeah. Yeah
That's terrible
So
Obviously it makes a difference how you think about
electrons and if you're trying to figure out how these molecular processes are happening and
This show was going to be about physiology
But I guess it makes a real difference of what your general theory of atomic structure is
you know the
idea of
Particular nature of matter
Sort of spread or diffused into the thinking process so that
atoms
the same way Einstein
Couldn't tolerate
multi-layer adsorption in 1915
Biochemists can't tolerate long-range
processes in biochemistry and
One of the
Thing things in chemistry that resembled
What Polanyi was seeing in in crystals and his other?
experiments
the inductive effect is
at the basis of
Really fundamental biological thinking about
Coasservate for example
Bungenberg de Jong
founded a
line of thinking that
Eventually led to a Gilbert Lange's
way of seeing the
the cell as a special state of matter and
One of the
basic and simple chemical physical principles
Necessary to think this way is
called
electronic induction in the molecule and
when you have
atoms that are
Electron withdrawing or they have an affinity for electrons you put them in the molecule and
the
Charge or the intensity of the electrons effect
Shifts down the molecular chain towards that
electron withdrawing atom or group
So it's it's like a partial electron and
That that's an essential part now of organic chemistry that you have partial charges, but
when you
really take that seriously and see that
this effect
Exists everywhere in every molecule in the cell
it goes to another level which is
the
Coordinated or coherent
Effects of
The
Electron
Inducing
groups, so you you have a
collective kind of reaction
And in which you pass a threshold sort of the way liquid water passes to solid water
They can be at the same temperature, but
someone has to start the process and and then it can go like a
cascade all at once the
Atoms will fall into place. Hmm. You change the state so
You can have a solid
water
at somewhat above the melting temperature or liquid water well below the freezing temperature
if you don't have this
cooperativity of
molecules and atoms and
when you combine these added
these ideas of
cooperativity and
induction
You get
These group effects where you have a change of state in effect
Which will pass through the bulk of the material
So that you can start thinking about how it works with
Looking at the effects of pH on a protein
okay, but
That's the simplest
effect of the
pH although the same all the way through a solution and the protein
With its
various charged groups
responding to that pH
so that the internal fields
are
Intensified or decreased according to the pH so you can have a protein
expanding or collapsing according to the
pH of its surroundings, but
Then when you add
Other molecules binding or associating with that protein and
Those have electron withdrawing or donating properties
Then the way that protein responds to a certain pH is different. I
see and
These electron withdrawing molecules are in a sense a partial
oxidation
Oxidation being taking away of electrons. Mm-hmm
So the
degree of
oxidation in a molecule
defines how electron withdrawing it is and
the
totality of
molecules with that quality in the system such as a
protein or a group of proteins in the solvent
that will
affect the the global degree of oxidation of the system and
When it reaches a certain point instead of just one protein
Collapsing or expanding you get the same
freeze melt
Transition in which one protein triggers another one and so on. I see
So you get coherent cooperative
types of changes throughout the system
That that's where the
Tending to think discreetly has been so strongly affected by the
the
particulate electron particulate proton particulate photon
type of thinking
so that people don't like to
get involved in those
cooperative global effects I
see, so I
Don't know if I'm gonna probably got this confused, but it sounds like there's several things that affect how quickly a chemical change happens
In the body or elsewhere and that one of them is the environment. So the pH surrounding
The substance where the change might happen is key. And then the other
part is
The materials that are attached to that substance
so if you're telling protein and then the protein might have other molecules attached to it that actually enhance or
deter the change happening
yeah, and that's
one of the complexities of
the living stages that
It if you kill it
It doesn't work the same
So you have to think of it always in a certain environment
hmm
That you have to really think of it as a flow from from the environment
in and out
And the rate of flow and intensity of flow and so on
The the way people think about antioxidants even tends to
Turn into a static description rather than a flowing process
L is is always when it's alive
Maintaining a delicate balance between oxidation and and reduction and so
Antioxidants are a dynamic process in which they're also oxidants
if they're if you push towards a
Dominance of reduction then you kill the cell in in a different way
Ray can you back up a little bit and just explain the origin of the word oxidant and and and what it means?
um
In the 18th century when they were thinking of phlogiston
That you had to deflogisticate
Something what does that mean?
the it was
something that left
a
burning substance and
It meant the exhaustion
when when
phlogiston had
Filled up the space you couldn't burn anything more in it
and
It made it very hard to understand chemical reactions, but then priestly and
I
Guess lab OSCA was another one
Two or three people around the same time were we're seeing
That there was something
Being consumed from the air in the process of burning rather than added to it and
the
when they
started studying what was being consumed in the air as they saw that it generally made an
acid form
and so the
I think was priestly who named it the
the substance that makes burning possible in the air he called the
acid former or the oxygen
Oxygen
Root for acid or sour
mm-hmm
So so many acids were formed by oxygen that got its name as the source of acid
and
It isn't an absolute there are acids without oxygen and and that
leads into the the whole issue of pH but
Thinking of oxygen in relation to its ability to form acids
That's a very important to integrate with your thinking of what a cell is doing
and
People tend to have
Begun thinking of carbon dioxide is simply a waste product
but if you think of the electronic
Balance
between oxidation and reduction
holding the proteins and
other things of the cell in a certain very specific
state or confirmation
Changing the pH is
crucial and
this partial
oxidation that you get
at a lower pH
which
governs the arrangement of the protein and other substances
carbon dioxide
turns out to be a
universal
Balancing factor or a adjuster of the
acidic properties of the protein
So the the acid formed by oxygen in this case carbon dioxide
It's in itself it's an acid as defined by Gilbert Lewis
and it doesn't have the protons so you
you need
talk about the pH really because it's
It's a non protic acid just two oxygens in the carbon
but this arrangement an oxygen doubly bonded to a carbon
Creates that
electron withdrawing property the intrinsic partial
oxidizing property of that molecule which when it attaches to a protein it
increases the acidity of the protein
Making it slightly partially more oxidized more city and
that changes its affinity for
other things according to how negatively charged its groups are and
This this is
the kind of thinking that
up to the
the Gilbert Ling
orientation
Accounting for cells and their metabolism without the hypothetical membrane and its pumps
the
pH and the
acid property of the protein system
maintains by
the carbon dioxide produced by
oxidation
This is the central thing in
Explaining why cells can discriminate
between
sodium and potassium and
calcium and magnesium and all of the discriminations that cells make
You don't need a little magic pump
moving things in and out
that would
Consume more energy than the cell has
The energy of the cell is really being produced
To form
Carbon dioxide and the carbon dioxide is changing the and maintaining the properties
Preventing excess
Electron accumulation
And
It since it's a continuing streaming process you have
oxygen streaming in and carbon dioxide streaming out and
the carbon dioxide
Reacting as an acid with water
Shifts the the property of the the water atom
So the the water joins with the carbon dioxide forming carbonic acid
which ionizes
You now have a negative charge on the carbon dioxide
streaming out of the cell it takes
Positive charges out with it
otherwise the cell would
quickly become highly electrically charged so the
movement of oxygen in carbon dioxide out is
taking out
the sodium and calcium
As a streaming continuous maintenance process
Wow
so this is the
Most people have heard of the membrane theory of cells that they're basically bags
Holding this cytoplasm in and this is in case you didn't get this. This is an alternative theory that it's actually being regulated
By the products of the mitochondria is that right right so the mitochondria is producing the co2
When it makes the ATP
The energy we all use the ATP and so the co2 starts off as an electron acceptor, but then it becomes
negatively charged and
that bonds with the
positive
Metal ions the magnesium and calcium
Yeah, it doesn't necessarily bond with them, but in leaving they tend to get dragged out, too
I see and why is the co2 leaving?
Just because it's being constantly formed inside and it just diffuses out down the gradient
So that's like an osmotic pressure
um
No, yeah, well
But the diffusion pressure
It's it's going down the gradient
like if you
put alcohol
against water
Tend to mix the alcohol will move into the water and the water into the alcohol
Until they're more or less even and
When you have a high concentration of co2 in the cell
at a certain point it starts
Being more at ease outside of the cell I see so it's a diffusion process
yeah, and that accounts for taking it out into the extracellular space and the blood and
When it gets into the blood
it having
taken the
Sodium and some other things with it
It circulates to the lungs and
Changes
back to carbon dioxide, which is
again
Going down its gradient from a high concentration in your blood to a lower
Concentration in the fresh air you breathe so the the carbon dioxide is leaving the blood and it leaves behind
the
Molecules or ions that it took out of the cells
and so the
Absence of the acidic carbon dioxide in the blood leaves the blood now with a higher pH
because of the
movement of
Sodium and such out of the cell hmm
I see
So the normal situation is is for a healthy cell to be
just faintly under
neutrality
and
for the blood to be
definitely over neutrality and like inside the cell 6.9 pH and
in the blood
7.4 roughly
Okay
7.4 I see so that's a little bit higher than the cell is low. Yeah
Yeah, go on
The
Lot of people have
Seen a disease as caused by a
low pH or too much acidity and
In the case of stress and
Cancer a tumor will
become very acidic
so that traditional idea has as a basis that
An infection or a tumor
the inflammation
produces high concentration of lactic acid and
And a very low pH in that area
which does have
disruptive toxic effects on that area and so the body is
Able generally to correct that and
Reduce the inflammation and stop the production of lactic acid, but the
When lactic acid is formed it
If the conversion from pyruvic acid to lactic acid
Is drawing an extra proton out of the NADH
Catalyst that causes the conversion and
In taking away this extra proton as as it leaves it
In its formation it
Raises the pH inside the cell
so even though a tumor or an infection is
Locally you see
excess acid
Hydro lactic acid inside the cell that's doing that
It's the reverse process you get an increase in the pH
inside the cell and
So the cell which is stuck if it gets stuck in producing
Lactic acid because it can't produce
co2 and that means it also tends to get stuck at a higher pH and
this higher pH
Changes the whole system
And
That's that's where you tend to get a self replicating tumor
Because the normal acidic conditions maintained by the co2
Are lost I see
Okay, that's that's
Good to know and maybe you could explain for us. I don't think you have to go through the entire
Cycle, but you're talking about
Cellular respiration and I don't think people generally know that pyruvic
when you're talking about that you're talking about the products or the process of
Making the energy that we all use and could could you just give us a little cliff note version of that?
yeah, the
Looking at us in our environment. We're really sort of
sandwiched between the sugar energy we get from plants and
The carbon dioxide that we make as the final product of the energy from the sugar
and the
Series of
Changes in the sugar molecule
each
Oxidation of that molecule
Adds a little chemical energy to the cell that the cells can use to make proteins
As it degrades the sugar it builds up
amino acids and proteins and fats and
When you're unable to
Oxidize the sugar all the way down to carbon dioxide and
produce
Amylactic acids instead halfway you're losing the greatest part of the energy stored in the glucose molecule
and that lack of energy
Has its repercussions but
when there's really a
lack of oxygen to continue the
oxidation that NADH which
Allowed pyruvic acid to take this shortcut off
into the semi toxic lactic acid
That has to be renewed before you can even make another lactic acid
So without oxygen
You need some kind of oxidant
to even continue
producing that kind of low energy from sugar to
Pyruvic and lactic acid and to do that cells
can
produce fat
And get rid of their electrons by building them in the fat
So building fat in a way is an alternative very bad one to
Using up oxygen and making co2
So interestingly cancers which get stuck in the
Exclusive use of converting glucose or amino acids to
Lactic acid as their energy supply. They also get stuck making
fat
That becomes their oxygen in effect
And then when they
Still have mitochondrial function
the
cell burns fat as it's energy source
so it's a
Really a deranged and crazy
kind of metabolism to
produce
an irritant lactic acid
to
And to do that it has to make fat which is then used as fuel
with with its own
Consequences
And is that that's called
glycolysis
Yeah, it's aerobic glycolysis when you make lactic acid
in the presence of oxygen
and
ordinary
anaerobic
Glycolysis is what happens when you
Exercise too hard
You're you can build up lactic acid
In getting out of breath
The the blood lactate
increases if you exercise faster than your breathing and
That's normal. You can a little later consume and oxidize the lactic acid and that's okay
when when you
Start producing lactic acid even in the presence of oxygen as in the case of cancer
or
Extreme trauma or shock same thing happens something turns the the trigger
So that even though oxygen is is present in shock
you will
Waste waste your sugar and make lactic acid. I
See so oxygen is there and but it's not you're unable to use it
Yeah, and the nervous system is
In the case of shock at least the nervous system is involved in making that
aerobic glycolysis and
So there are quite a few people who have
Suggested that the nervous system is involved in in the cancer transition doing the same thing that shock and trauma
Can do acutely?
hmm
Wow, I have to take a short break here and say that you're listening to WM rw lp1 and
We're streaming live at WM rw.org or 95 1 FM and you're listening to politics and science
I'm John Barkas and the host and my guest today is
Dr. Raymond Peat. He said has a PhD in biology and a speciality in physiology and
we're talking around the subject of
Oxidation and health and what role oxidation plays in maintaining that health
There's
More I want to ask you about the
The not being able to
use the oxygen that's present and
Anaerobic it's anaerobic glycolysis, even though there's oxygen there
And how aerobic oh
and then it's called aerobic like hell is this I see and I
How does the mitochondria make do with burning a fat? How is that even possible?
um
it's
And what what are the problems with that? Oh
It produces less carbon dioxide for example, I think that's the main problem
The
If you develop
fat stores you get
particles of fat accumulating in the cytoplasm and maybe in the nucleus that
Probably have a disruptive effect when you're heavily shifted over to a fat economy
I see if the
The tumor makes saturated fat
as
its
first product in in converting
sugar to saturated fat
But
when it's shifting
in in the presence of stress when it shifts to burning fat
Usually that will go through your fat stores
Burning up your your subcutaneous fat
quickly, so when the person is very sick with cancer, for example, they get a
gaunt initiated look as as their
Superficial fat stores are are used up and at the same time
They convert amino acids to energy
Converting some of it to sugar and some to fat
So it starts a wasting process but our stores
the older person gets generally the higher the amount of polyunsaturated fat in their stores and
When you're oxidizing polyunsaturated fats that produces more
oxidative damage to the mitochondria
So it tends to
lower the oxidative a part of metabolism and and slow things down in general I
See and then people end up feeling a lot less energy levels
Generally get run down
Yeah
that happens
in midlife to lots of people that
It resembles the cancer metabolism, but it just shows up as fatigue
low energy use in general
some people or where
Textbooks used to say that you would always lose weight if you ate less than 1700 calories per day
Lots of people can maintain their weight on 700 calories a day
And
That requires turning off of the thyroid function to a great extent and
So you're
Being wasteful even though you're not using
Very much energy at all what you are using
Tends to be poorly used and destructive
so you tend to
reduce your
Connective tissue and muscle and and
digestive system and so on
rather than
Just living on on what you're eating or stored fat
Well, so basically basically you're hibernating
You got fuzzy I couldn't tell
It's very girdly, okay
I'm gonna call you back. You back. We'll resume resume. Okay. Okay. Okay. Bye
Hello you're on the air, can you hear me?
Yeah, you're still a little still gargling
Not as bad as it was. Okay, we're you're coming through fine. So if you if you can
Put up with it. We can we're good to go. Okay
So our fats always the part of the process of respiration oxidizing fats or is that only when you're ill
Yeah, it's only under stress generally and
Starvation. Mm-hmm or or diabetes or
or a
High high level of stress. I see a lot of people are on those
ketosis
diets where they don't eat any
carbohydrates and
Does that cause you to burn fats?
And protein and protein, right?
Yeah, your brain and some other tissues the intestine and red blood cells and
various
little
little areas, but especially the brain and have an absolute
requirement for some sugar some glucose and
They all get it by breaking down
Amino acids and they get that from eating your tissues if you aren't
eating
enough
amino acids, but if you
are eating amino acids as your
Energy source fats and amino acids
you
Turn on the machinery for turning
Amino acids into glucose and fat and
running that
machinery involves turning on stress hormones a whole range of
hormones adjust to it and
I
Think those have chronic harmful effects. I
See so I know when people do it they're usually in a very controlled
Setting they go in for regular checkups and I think that I don't actually know but I think they take blood and urine samples and
You know, they're trying to make sure you're not actually endangering yourself
Most of the proteins that are are being eaten under those systems
most of them are too high in phosphate and
Usually too high in in this ionine
cysteine and tryptophan and
cysteine is an excited toxic amino acid and
Methionine
is involved in in stress and aging when in proportion to its excess so that
one of the most effective life extending
Diets is simply to reduce the amount of methionine in the diet drastically
So the sulfur amino acids and tryptophan are
stress and aging promoters
Especially excited toxic damage to the nerves
And
And the high phosphate for most of the popular proteins
The high phosphate is
has a lot of
excitatory harmful effects
the
cloth
Oh gene and protein that is deficient in
Animals that have a very quick aging process
that's
Largely a phosphate handling
protein and
The rapid aging produced by lacking that protein and gene
is
involves accumulating excess phosphate
And that in phosphate you get from eating meat primarily or
meat is
one of the highest ratios of phosphate to
the other minerals
But several of the very high quality proteins
Even mushrooms have a pretty high ratio of phosphate to calcium
milk is
Milk and cheese are about half and half which is probably safe, but
fruits and leaves
leafy green vegetables have a very safe low very low phosphate content relative to
Calcium and magnesium and potassium. I see so fruits and vegetables are
The best but you're not getting much protein in that case so
You need some milk and cheese, too
Yeah, and probably a fairly low protein diet is
Very good for the health but in the sense of living a long time but
For
Maintaining
tissue renewal
You can't go below a certain amount of tryptophan
cysteine and thiamine those are
rapid turnover
proteins
Okay
You know I think Ray I'm going to turn to some of the questions
I receive from people in preparation for the show because I know if I wait
We're gonna be short on time, and I want to make sure you have time to answer them
Last week we talked about or you mentioned Luca Turin and his research on
I think it was odors and the electrical nature of odors he had
maybe you could
when you get to answering this you could go over that a little bit, but
Somebody wanted to know what your feelings are about multiple chemical sensitivity
and that's
pretty common these days a lot of people can be made very ill by a perfume or the smell of bounce and
What do you think of is going on and does that relate to Luca Turin's work?
yeah, I think it does and
See he was
Talking specifically about
Smell and and
psychoactive like antidepressant chemicals and
there is when you look at the
what's in common between
Smelling and
Having the antidepressant effect of some chemicals
what's in common is
the resonance state or the tuning of the molecule to the
Oxidation state
Which is
in this context of
partially oxidized proteins in a
coherent cooperative system
The whole system has to be tuned to a certain level of reduction and oxidation and
The the addition of a chemical whether it's an antidepressant or a perfume molecule
and
Passes along the conductive
Pathways of the nervous system and
Cells all through the body are are involved in
The delicate nerve balances the vegetative or autonomic nervous system
Regulates the state of inflammation
of the tissues for example
There are lots of
cells
closely associated with
fibers of the nervous system
Cells called mast cells for example that can regulate
inflammation all through the body
in the brain as well as
all the other tissues and and these are are connected and
Balanced with with the nervous system. So a slight shift in your autonomic nervous system
Can
Globally change the degree of inflammation all through your body
Increasing the amount of histamine and serotonin and
the various products of the mast cells
this is
when a person is under stress chronically these inflammatory things tend to rise and
When you increase your
intensity of
mitochondrial respiration and your level of carbon dioxide
that
Stabilizes the system backs away from that excess
inflammatory
reductive impulse but
When you're right on the edge
Just balanced
not intense enough
oxidation going on then a
perfume molecule or a
Psychoactive chemical or a food molecule can
Send impulses through your system shifting you
away from the
oxidative excitatory processes towards the
Side of your nervous system that becomes dominant in shock
So I think the the chronic fatigue and
chemical sensitivity inflammatory states
Are
In effect a variation on the physiology of shock
Hmm, that's really fascinating
I mean, it's amazing that somebody can actually wear a product because they like the smell but that same product
The smell of which can make somebody else deadly ill
um, yeah, I think it's a
Depends on the way you're nervous and chemical system is is tuned up
I mean everything oxidation and reduction is involved in and all of our processes that are
Chemical. Yeah
lactic acid
Is a reductant as well as a product of of being reduced
And turning it into lactic acid from pyruvic acid
Involves an electronic
addition or reduction but it
then when it goes to a
balanced or healthy healthy cell
It shifts the balance towards reduction
And if you have oxygen in that cell, it's okay. The electrons will be consumed
but
Lactic acid itself has this potential for shifting the balance for example in
the mast cells that are
signals for more inflammation
Too much lactic acid will activate their
releases and
so systemically
letting too much lactic acid circulate is
adding to the
The inflammatory state
And I know you've told me before people might be interested in this that
you're not very fond of yogurt because of the
lactic acid so you can actually
Absorb lactic acid from your food directly. I mean, yeah, there are some kinds of yogurt that have very little
lactic acid
You can
thicken the milk
enzymically
rather than
With a lot of acid and those very mild yogurts
aren't
Especially harmful, but if they're very sour with lactic acid
and if your liver is
On edge not enough thyroid function
then
That slight shift in towards the reduction side
Can have systemic effects and can bring on
allergic reactions migraine headaches and such and
So just talking specifically about yogurt if you we have a local yogurt
Maker around here and I find if you buy it immediately
You know as soon as it comes out, there's hardly no apparent lactic acid in it
But the longer it sits the more the acids
separates from the actual
Milk product so I'm wondering is that acid
Forming as it goes or is it always in there and you just shouldn't eat it period?
No, the
Bacteria are making it. Okay
So a young a young yogurt would be fine
Yeah, I think so. Okay
Yeah, because that you can also strain your yogurt which is the same as buying Greek yogurt
And that gets rid of it and basically makes a thicker or cheesier
Thank you product. Yeah, that's the
idea of cottage cheese
They drain away
most of the fluid the way
And that takes away the almost all of the lactic acid for most cheeses
Okay. Well, that's good to know that fresh yogurt is okay. I guess got a question coming in on the same subject
We were talking about a second ago
From Duncan. I bought a perfume base from a chemical company some years ago
And it was so toxic that UPS was afraid to deliver it. I had to go pick it up myself on
the MSDS toxicity scale
Which goes from 0 to 4 this was a 6
Yep, two points over the max for chemical toxicity
Perfumes are very poisonous. He concludes. What's the MSDS? Is that the manufacturers?
Safety data sheet. Thank you. Yes. All right, and he also asked you contribute to Wikipedia
No, okay, and I'll go ahead
someone has asked me to
Comment on the
association induction hypothesis
Article a very good long article
Describing Gilbert things theory a lot of people are jumping on it
Saying that it should be
Eliminated from Wikipedia because it's wrong
Wow, well, that's surprising. I wonder if I've Gerald Pollack who also basically
Derived a lot of his work from Gilbert Lange and says so I wonder if he might be there defending him
Yeah, I I don't know how you get involved. I
When I find out I think I'll
Say keep it, please. Yeah, okay
That would be good. Um
Let's see, and I have some more questions here. I should I'm gonna find them so we get to them before the show is over
This is from Paul
He says I am a 34 year old male and since about eight months
Type one diabetic. I believe I got diabetes after x-rays from my dentist
I'm curious if you think that's possible. I take daily insulin and follow a pro metabolic diet. I
supplement aspirin vitamin a vitamin e vitamin K b1 b3 glycine
pregnenolone magnesium glycinate
I am still in a so-called honeymoon phase and I would very much like to prolong this phase or even get off all insulin
Do you have any tips or supplements? I might add to my regimen and he says thank you from the bottom of his heart
Before I was born my father had extreme diabetes went down to
Something like 90 pounds or less
couldn't
assimilate any kind of food
even pure protein
Raised his urine glucose tremendously and looking at old
Naturopathic remedies
He started eating as his only food
Brewers yeast gator, I guess two cups a day at first and
immediately stopped producing
so much
Glucose in his urine and in a few months was completely well
Every maybe five years or so after that he would
Eat some extra brewers yeast, but never had any symptom of
diabetes after that and
I think part of that effect is the
the hormones in the yeast
which
stimulate
Regeneration and high potassium content which has an insulin like action
And the high B vitamins
But
having enough glucose so that you don't
draw any
Polyunsaturated fats out of storage. Those are very toxic to the
The pen the insulin producing cells in the pancreas
They are
Normally, they're constantly turning over the beta cells are being renewed
constantly and in a diabetic they're being renewed but they die quickly and
Sugar is a factor that will prolong their lifespan
It doesn't need anything to stimulate renewal just to prevent them being killed
primarily by the polyunsaturated fats and the
Nitric oxide is
Soon after
It was discovered that the body produces its own nitric oxide in the early 90s many
articles came out demonstrating that nitric oxide is specifically
what kills the beta cells and
so you definitely don't want to
Do anything that?
Would increase your nitric oxide production. What kind of activity does that well?
supplementing
Arginine or foods high in arginine
Wouldn't probably be desirable
okay, and
I think the the effects of aspirin and the B vitamins and the vitamin E
Pregnenol and then progesterone and
DHEA
Around
1985 I think it was someone
gave rabbits
diabetes with a chemical toxin and then gave them a supplement of DHEA and
That was the only difference the ones that got the DHEA
Regenerated healthy insulin producing pancreases
Hmm
And that has to be taken in small amounts. Are you converted to estrogen? Is that right?
Yeah, 10 to 15 milligrams is probably a safe amount
All right, and and one of the things that I think everybody will be surprised by is that you're actually advocating
taking sugar or glucose
Which is a couple of articles on my website I give some of the history of that
in
The late 19th century a couple of doctors
described cases that they cured
from
really advanced terminal diabetes people losing
weight
terrific rate
they added
Something like 12 ounces per day of sugar to an otherwise good diet
regular high protein and vegetables and
Milk and so on. Hmm, but just by adding 12 ounces of
sugar to that diet
In just a few weeks people came back from near death
Hmm and I guess their logic was since they were urinating out so much of their bodily sugar
They figured maybe they were short on sugar. Yeah
exactly, they their reasoning at first was
They're dying so fast. They're putting out
The equivalent of a pound of tissue
Converted to sugar every day
and
Just to slow down their starvation process. They said them and and they crave sugar. Why not let them
eat
what they crave and
maybe slow down their death, but instead they
Stopped wasting away and came back. Hmm
And I want to go back a little bit to because I think I did the person who asked the
Multiple chemical sensitivity question a little short shrift and that I never asked you. What can somebody do?
if if they're suffering from multiple chemical sensitivity
I'm
supplementing thyroid is the usual thing, but sometimes they're very low in cholesterol and
since thyroid works partly through
Converting cholesterol to
Hormones like progesterone DHA and pregnenolone
If your cholesterol is too low thyroid alone doesn't necessarily do it so
Supplementing one or more of those will very quickly often relieve the
Exaggerated sensitivity. Hmm
Okay
And it sounds like you said that the the rabbits were given
diabetes just by being poisoned
With a toxin and it sounds like that's happened. A lot of our diseases are actually
environmentally caused it's
You know, I know
they say a lot of people have predispositions to cancer and diabetes and stuff like that, but I
personally suspect a lot of it is just environmentally from the
from the pollution that's
inevitable in our industrial society
you know when I was starting on my
dissertation project I
wondered what
What the factors were that?
slowed down
oxidative processes in aging and
As I looked around at the possibilities, I saw that the same type of deterioration
the same
biochemical
patterns of interference with mitochondrial
Respiration were produced by a great variety of stresses
radiation ionizing radiation or
even ultraviolet to excess
Had an effect similar to all of the estrogens and the
aromatic hydrocarbon
carcinogens and hydrocarbons that produce
excitation and inflammation
and
Polyunsaturated fatty acids
produce the same the same pattern of
deterioration and the vitamin E
supplement was found to
Stop the characteristic damage. They were seeing in
lab rats and industrial animals for my feeding them too much unsaturated fat and
my thesis advisor
found that
The
effects of too much estrogen
were corrected by a very large vitamin E supplement and
Others were finding that vitamin E protects even against radiation and sunburn
and
so some of the
processes like the breakdown of
polyunsaturated fats are
Increasing our susceptibility to damage from all of those stressors radiation estrogen
Toxic heavy metals and so on. Mm-hmm and Ray is referring to the the liquid oils that
Everywhere in our
food supply the canola oil I
Think you think olive oils not too bad and butter is good
But all the vegetable oils except for coconut are not a good idea
yeah, olive oil has only you know, eight or ten percent of the
Unstable polyunsaturated
butter and coconut oil have two or maybe three percent of the unstable ones
I've
recently finally
Shifted
for in accordance with something that I read
about 40 years ago on the
absence of cancer in animals that were fed
different types of oil coconut oil was safer than olive oil which was safer than
safflower oil and the polyunsaturated but the safest of them all was
hydrogenated coconut oil
Recently I found a place
to get some
Just to try it out and it has a very nice
Clean taste and texture and it's it's free of trans fatty acids as well as polyunsaturated fats. No blues
the supplier
Doesn't supply a retail only
Car lot loads. So did you get a semi is it parked out back?
Behind your house
Was a very
Involved process to get oh, yeah a few gallons of it. Well, sometimes you can
Say you're thinking of buying a semi, but you just want a sample. Yeah. Yeah
Well, that's interesting. Did some of the animals get to eat butter?
Oh
Yeah
Butter and coconut oil. Uh-huh. We're the safest natural oils
Okay, and so let's talk about this is another thing that confuses me about oxidation reduction is sometimes
They refer to it as hydrogen
hydrogenation or dehydrogenation
But they're still talking about oxidation and reduction, aren't they?
Yeah, it's just a movement of
electrons that
they're talking about the
when we
make what when we
Turn saturated fat into unsaturated fat in our own bodies
we
Dehydrogenated
And when a cow turns
Unsaturated fat from their food into saturated fat for the butter
It's bacteria in their intestine and rumen which is saturating it
hydrogenating it so
Dehydrogenation
it is
Something that we do
In our own body I see and maybe you could describe for us
What is actually happening to the molecule is it you're actually removing the hydrogen and then that's what
They're actually referring to the electron
the movement of electrons out of the bonds is what makes a difference and
the
The usual thing that you move is a hydrogen atom or two hydrogen atoms
And when you take those away
the
like if it's on
to a draining carbon atoms in a fat molecule
There was a bond of two electrons between the carbons you take away a hydrogen from each one
and it takes
It's the proton and one electron leave in each case and they combine
to hydrogen atoms
Turn into hydrogen gas or go to some other molecule and the left behind
Electrons
Join with each other. So you get a double bond for electrons and joining those carbon atoms and
the absence of
This space filling hydrogen
Seems to leave that range of
electrons between carbons open and more reactive
So the
when you get a lot of hydrogens removed that makes
Access of oxygen atoms to the fat molecule easier. Hmm. I
See so that's why Crisco is actually a liquid oil, but it's been had the hydrogen added to it and that
Makes it more stable
Yeah, and if they would complete the process the way they do in
Changing coconut oil from two or three percent PUFA to zero percent PUFA
you wouldn't get the
trans-fat
in it and
so you would have
totally saturated and
mostly
stearic acid
In Crisco and that would be safe
One group of researchers found that aged
defective mitochondria
That were not respiring
properly
when they
Gave them fully saturated
I think was peanut oil
Restored mitochondrial function Wow
So it's a it's a way of purifying it. Um
yeah, and and it
Eliminates the
Unstable quality that makes things susceptible to oxidation
There
Physiologically, there's something called the
saturation index you can look at a person's red blood cells and find the ratio of
stearic acid fully saturated to linoleic acid
or linoleic different degrees of
unsaturation and
and the longer
Even more unsaturated and people with cancer have a low saturation index
It's a very stabilizing thing to yeah, like like a newborn baby is highly saturated in its fats
In recent years a lot of
Nutrition oriented doctors are saying you must give babies fish oil. Oh god other highly
highly unsaturated things because most babies are born
Deficient in the essential fatty acids, but that's the normal state of a newborn. Yeah animal. That's strange because
It just shows how disconnected
The medical authorities are with nature. I
Mean if you'd ever look for anything to for an idea of what perfection is you I think you'd look at a newborn creature
Yeah, the rate of oxidation is highest
I'm not not sure how much
how you would compare the prenatal oxidative state but right at
the newborn the
Consumption of
Oxygen and the sugar per gram of tissue is higher than it will ever be later
And it decreases
Especially at puberty with the the rise of the sex hormones
the oxidation rate
decreases more sharply and mortality rate increases as the
Oxidation rate decreases
Right, so
That makes perfect sense
now I better get back to my questions here from
Interested people Martin asks about salt and these are three questions about salt and
I'll just run through them as quickly as I can
Can salt ingestion trigger migraines in
Some predisposed people example mass max gerson and what would be the cycle?
I excuse me, what would be the physiological explanation?
Shall I read them all or do you want to take them one at a time? Oh
Are they related to the salt? Yeah, they're all about salt restriction
Yeah
The others, okay. Here's number two. Here's number two. Do you believe salt restriction was useful in the University of Munich's?
Tuberculosis trial with Max Gerson's diet under the supervision of Ferdinand sour brush if yes
was the beneficial effect due to a release of excess intracellular water and
three if salt restriction is useful in evacuating excess intracellular water present in
Degenerative diseases is it useful to keep restricting it once this excess?
Intercellular water has been evacuated should cancer patients keep avoiding salt after a few months of a saltless diet
Um, yeah, I read Gerson's book and he was
Very very good
thorough
Saw the effects of the diet first on migraines and then tuberculosis and then cancer
and
He tried to understand it and he
Seems to have read that just about everything in the first half of the century
on the subject
and
The the salts are extremely important the other
Contemporary of his
Cancer researcher
Had a very interesting parallel
Set of facts regarding salt
William Frederick Koch who was a chemistry professor at Michigan
Early in the century
Was studying the removal of the parathyroid glands
and a
calcium supplement was
The typical remedy for the cramping
Reaction to the removal of the parathyroid and the doctrine was developed that the parathyroid
regulates
Calcium and and so you need to replace calcium when the gland is removed but
Koch
Did the surgery on animals and found that if he gave them?
extra
Potassium or sodium or magnesium it had the same purity of effect
And
The
Essential fact was that one of these
can
make up for a deficiency of the other and
The Gerson diet was extremely high in
The other minerals especially potassium
and
There the diet always had
The amount of sodium that you would have in in juice leaves and fruits and vegetables and so on
so it was always a
physiological amount of sodium but
often a very excessive large amount of potassium and
Magnesium and I think these were the essence of Gerson's success rather than
just the
reducing sodium because
When you look at particular experiments
Sodium it can stimulate the respiration of a cell and
and
Cause it to
Unswell give up excess water
if you
Lower the the other minerals and give it too much sodium you can force it
To swell and take up water, but it's normal physiological function is to act as a stimulant
Calcium tends to do to do the same but
the
Cell normally is excluding sodium and
It perceives sodium as an irritant or stimulant and revs up its oxidative metabolism
When it
Has a little extra sodium and the increased oxidative metabolism
Produces carbon dioxide and restores the balance
So when they're in balance
The right amount of sodium is increasing
energy production and decreasing cell water content
And the
Much of this stuff
hadn't
been
specifically examined during
Gerson's lifetime, but he was definitely on to something and was curing
migraine and cancer
but he
very typically would give his patients a couple of grains of armor thyroid and
Very often coffee enemas and and they were always having a
Very high ratio of carbohydrate to
protein so they were low on the methionine and tryptophan and the
Potentially toxic amino acids
And
Generally lots of things in this program
were very well well founded but
There just wasn't enough information at that time about about how the balance of the alkaline minerals works
Yeah, and it sounds like there's so many variables going on there that it would be hard to
pin down any one
cause or
Yep, the
aldosterone
One of my first physiological experiments was on myself
When I worked in the woods our cook was cracked on the idea that
hard physical labor meant you sweated a lot and needed to replenish your salt and
That so he would put I think it was about a tablespoon of salt in everyone's porridge in the morning
if you didn't eat your porridge, you didn't get your ham and eggs on steak and
Everyone doing it and I
Within a few days of doing that. I found that
The sweat that dripped down my forehead was leaving salt crystal trails on my glasses
And my eyebrows looked like they were
coated with snow from the salt crystals and
I
Thought of the trick of saying that I had been put on a low salt diet. So I got normal porridge
here from then on and
Immediately I I could sweat distilled water
and
have I
On the high salt diet. I had to take salt salt pills
about
11 o'clock in the morning
Otherwise, I started getting faint needed to replenish the salt was pouring out so fast
But after the low salt diet, I never needed afternoon salt pills again
You mean the overdose of salt sort of stopped your body from being able to regulate it properly
yeah, and and the
when you're
Cutting back on the sodium
One of the first reactions is that your aldosterone is
increased
and aldosterone
Lets you retain the sodium, but it doesn't at the expense of
losing some potassium and magnesium
So if your diet is high in calcium and magnesium
And
Potassium
then there isn't any problem with the
low sodium intake but
chronically that high aldosterone has a
pro-inflammatory effect and and so chronically
Getting more of all of the alkaline minerals than you really need is a safety precaution that
will suppress your aldosterone and protect your heart from
Inflammation and fibrosis and hypertension and so on so in the long run
Sodium has this protection against cell swelling inflammation fibrosis inflammation
And in if taken in reasonable amounts it tastes good too
And what about can salt ingestion trigger migraines in some predisposed people?
Yeah, when when you're
already
on a low salt diet and
Take salt one of the common physiology experiments is to
have people
drink a quart of plain water or a quart of plain water with a
heaping
teaspoon of salt added to it and
at the end of the physiology lab
Everyone who got the unsalted quarter water
Would have formed about a quart of urine and the ones that got the salt didn't have any extra forming
And it took a usually a couple days
For that excess water to to come out
So when you take a sudden dose of salt it makes you swell up and retain water
until your
Aldosterone has adjusted downward. I see so it just takes a while to do it adjust to it
Yeah, and you'll notice
Anything that is
Susceptible will swell up your fingers and toes and and lips and
eyelids and such might swell up in the first day after you eat a lot of salt, but
people who
For example on a long airplane trip would always get swollen feet
If they adjusted two or three days in advance by eating extra salt on some baking soda
They didn't get swollen feet from sitting still anymore. Huh? I
see, so
So you're retaining the you're retaining the liquid then and in a different place or are you not?
No, you're suppressing the aldosterone. So it
Gets the water out of you
the one of the ways sodium works is
the albumin molecule is
full of negative charges and it holds
the sodium
In in association so you get a cloud of
positive negative charges which holds on the water it
keeps the
water osmotically
held in in your bloodstream
If you're low in either albumin or sodium
your
blood itself
loses the osmotic
quality and the water stays in your cells and
extravascular spaces
When the combination of albumin and sodium is present in the blood
water
flows out of the tissues into the blood and the blood passing through the kidneys then
can get rid of the water that otherwise would sit around in your tissues and
that same situation
Impairs circulation because your blood volume is low and the fluid volume
Outside the blood vessels is is too high. Oh, I see, right
and the the anti-diuretic
hormone is a another side of this that is a lot more complicated than and responds to
distress
Estrogen and and a lot of other things where the aldosterone is is pretty closely related to the mineral balance
And what is the anti-diuretic hormone? Is that what are you calling? What is that?
It's a pituitary
hormone
that causes water retention
with sodium loss
and a
low thyroid person
old people
people after accidents
anyone in serious stress
The they call it inappropriate secretion of anti-diuretic hormone
syndrome and that's very common where
edema is the
What what is really harmful the brain swells up for example, because the body has too much water and not enough salt
and
the remedy for that
is
Just adding sodium but
That's not fundamental and if you do it too fast, you disturb the balance in the different compartments
but the basic reason for it is that you aren't producing the
carbon dioxide from a thyroid deficiency and
the absence of the
high production of carbon dioxide means that you aren't able to
retain the sodium in your kidneys as as the water passes through
and so the low thyroid person loses sodium because the
Reverse of the process that
happens in other cells in the kidneys
carbon dioxide allows the cells to
catch and retain sodium
Well, that's fascinating and
Can't say I get it all but I understand it a little bit that's that's very interesting Ray. Thanks for
explaining all that and I had more questions, but I didn't have any more from other people I think I got I got to them all and
anything you want to say to
sum up about
Staying healthy and keeping your oxidation working. Well, we have about two minutes. Oh
Just keeping stress down and the fun up
Judging food by
Largely by how it tastes rather than by what the experts say. Okay. Well, that's easy advice to follow
so on that note Ray, I really want to thank you for coming on these last two shows and
And I'll tell people how to get in touch with your website if they want to read more
Then I'll say goodbye
Okay. All right. You thank you so much. Thank you so much, Ray
Yep, bye